

===== PAGE 1 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, VOL. 25, 2023 6729
Subjective Functionality and Comfort Prediction for
Apartment Floor Plans and Its Application to
Intuitive Online Property Search
Taro Narahara , Member, IEEE , and Toshihiko Yamasaki , Member, IEEE
Abstract —This paper presents a new user experience for online
apartment search using functionality and comfort as query items.
Speciﬁcally, it has three technical contributions. First, we present
a new dataset on the perceived functionality and comfort scores
of residential ﬂoor plans using nine question statements about
the level of comfort, openness, privacy, etc. Second, we propose
an algorithm to predict the scores from the ﬂoor plan images.
Lastly, we implement a new apartment search system and conduct a
large-scale usability study using crowdsourcing. The experimental
results show that our apartment search system can provide a better
user experience. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work
to propose a highly accurate machine learning model for predicting
the subjective functionality and comfort of apartments.
Index Terms —Attractiveness prediction, crowdsourcing, graph
analysis, real estate ﬂoor plans.
I. I NTRODUCTION
IN RECENT years, the real estate industry has been show-
ing increasing interest in applying machine learning-assisted
solutions such as price prediction [1], [2], [3], [4] and apartment-
searching [5] tools. Some online platforms can help users search
for properties by specifying metadata, such as the type of apart-
ment and room size. However, many users inspect ﬂoor plans
based on more intuitive sensory impressions, such as living com-
fort,openness , and privacy . This makes it difﬁcult to estimate
the perceptive values of apartments through any currently avail-
able retrieval system, as there are no quantiﬁable data that rep-
resent such subjective characteristics of apartments. Moreover,
Manuscript received 15 March 2022; revised 3 July 2022 and 7 August 2022;
accepted 25 September 2022. Date of publication 27 October 2022; date of cur-
rent version 1 November 2023. This work was supported by the CREI Research
Project of The University of Tokyo. The Associate Editor coordinating the re-
view of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. Abderrahim
Benslimane. (Corresponding author: Taro Narahara.)
This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval of
all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by the Insti-
tutional Review Board (IRB) of New Jersey Institute of Technology (F466-20)
and The University of Tokyo (UT-IST-RE190927-1).
Taro Narahara is with the Hillier College of Architecture and Design (HCAD),
New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), Newark, NJ 07102 USA (e-mail:
narahara@njit.edu).
Toshihiko Yamasaki is with the Department of Information and Commu-
nication Engineering, Graduate School of Information Science and Technol-
ogy, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan (e-mail: ya-
masaki@cvm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TMM.2022.3214072, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TMM.2022.3214072apartment properties listed with the same size and type in their
metadata (e.g., two-bedroom apartments) could feature differ-
ent room arrangements, which will have a signiﬁcant impact
on their functionality and overall livability. Therefore, further
understanding the relationships between ﬂoor plan images and
structured data, including the connectivity of rooms and meta-
data, could improve the user experience on real estate search
platforms.
Information on ﬂoor plans has been widely adopted by users
to evaluate the values of properties over the years, as can be
seen in many real estate portal sites today. A ﬂoor plan image
of an apartment includes various room types, room sizes, and
connections and spatial layouts of the rooms. According to a cus-
tomer survey conducted in Japan1, a ﬂoor plan was found to be
among the top ﬁve priorities for customers during their apart-
ment search. Moreover, it was found that customers are very
reluctant to compromise on their preferred ﬂoor plans and are
often willing to invest more for their pursuits. Essential elements
that largely inﬂuence functional, environmental, and some per-
ceptive characteristics of apartments, such as locations of walls,
columns, windows, and wet areas, are already set in the ﬂoor
plans, and cannot be changed no matter the ﬁnish materials or
furniture used. Although we can estimate the subjective quality
of apartments, such as living comfort , simply by looking at the
ﬂoor plan images, no related work nor dataset has been reported
for such a task.
In this study, therefore, we ﬁrst constructed a new dataset that
contains 1,000 ﬂoor plan images (hereafter, “dataset A”). Each
image has a subjective score from nine perspectives relating to
perceived quality and functionality of the apartments. Exam-
ples of the generated dataset are shown in Figure 1. Based on
this dataset, we developed a multimodal neural network-based
framework to predict subjective apartment scores via their ﬂoor
plan images, graph representations, and various metadata. The
experimental results showed that we can predict the scores with
a correlation coefﬁcient of 0.701 on average. This is relatively
high, considering that they are all subjective scores. Our study
shows that the baseline model, which uses features based on
images alone, has a much lower average correlation coefﬁcient
of 0.491, even using ResNet50, the state-of-the-art network for
image recognition tasks.
1[Online]. Available:https://suumo.jp/article/oyakudachi/oyaku/chintai/fr_
data/hikkoshi-sumikae2017/, accessed 09/16/2020
© 2022 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

===== PAGE 2 =====
6730 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, VOL. 25, 2023
Fig. 1. Examples of our functionality evaluation dataset using real estate ﬂoor plan images. Each example shows a ﬂoor plan image, a bar graph for nine e valuation
measures, and a graph from left to right. (a) Highest scoring ﬂoor plan; (b) lowest scoring ﬂoor plan; (c) ﬂoor plan that scored high on modernity; (d) ﬂo or plan
that scored low on modernity.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows.rWe created and analyzed a large-scale dataset of subjective
evaluations of both perceived quality and functionality of
real estate ﬂoor plan images using crowdsourcing. (i.e.,
3,128 participants rated 1,000 ﬂoor plans based on nine
subjective criteria.)rOur proposed prediction model, which extracts features
from ﬂoor plan images and their graph structures, proved
to be effective and highly accurate with average correla-
tion coefﬁcient of 0.701. We also developed a workﬂow to
extract semantically segmented ﬂoor plan images, graphs,
and graph-related features for our multimodal deep neural
network model.rUpon using a new set of ﬂoor plan images (with predicted
scores by our model as a dataset), our proposed apartment
search tool was found to provide a signiﬁcantly better user
experience than the baseline tool without the proposed fea-
ture.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we report the
results of our literature survey. Section III explains dataset cre-
ation. Section IV describes the methodology utilized in the study.
Section V explains the experiments and their results. Section VI
describes the usability study of our proposed apartment search
tool. Section VII discusses the limitations of our approach, with
concluding remarks included in Section VIII.
II. R ELATED WORKS
A. Real Estate Tasks Using Property Images
Several researchers have worked on tasks related to real estate
using property images. In [2], the authors tried to improve the
accuracy of real estate price prediction by predicting the luxury
levels of the rooms using the appearance and interior images of
properties. Law et al. [6] showed that street view and satellite
images are also helpful when predicting house prices. In [7],
the researchers attempted to predict the construction age of theproperty by combining the predictions for each of its salient im-
age patch, resulting in greater accuracy than human prediction.
Moreover, deep learning has been applied to real estate prop-
erty images, and some studies have analyzed real estate images
themselves. In [8], real estate images were classiﬁed into differ-
ent types (e.g., bedroom, kitchen, living, and garden) by employ-
ing contrast-limited adaptive histogram equalization (CLAHE)
and applying long short-term memory (LSTM) in both verti-
cal and horizontal directions. Wang et al. [9] predicted which
among two images of the same property is more attractive using
a pairwise comparison network.
These works demonstrated the use of images in speciﬁc tasks
that are related to the appearance of the property. In our task,
to comprehensively represent the user experience in term of the
perceived quality and functionality, we assumed that ﬂoor plan
information with related metadata can provide more structured
and detailed information on the property.
B. Real Estate Tasks Using Floor Plan
Several related works have been conducted on ﬂoor plan im-
age analysis. Before the development of deep learning, some
researchers manually and graphically analyzed ﬂoor plans us-
ing adjacency graphs (with rooms, corridors, and other features
as labeled nodes) and used them to classify apartments into dif-
ferent types [10]. Takizawa et al. [11] analyzed the relationships
among adjacency graph structures of apartment ﬂoor plans and
their rental fees. They extracted subgraphs from the adjacency
graphs and effectively estimated the rent from the presence and
absence of common subgraphs. However, the cost of creating
adjacency graphs by hand was very high.
Floor plan images have also proved to be useful for rent price
prediction [12], [13], [14]. In [12], [13], it was demonstrated
that conventional bag-of-features (BoFs) [15] has the potential
to achieve lower-error prediction with smaller variance, although
the contribution of BoFs was smaller than that of other apartment

===== PAGE 3 =====
NARAHARA AND YAMASAKI: SUBJECTIVE FUNCTIONALITY AND COMFORT PREDICTION 6731
attribute information. In [14], image features were applied to
hedonic price models [16] to predict the apartment rent price
after controlling for locational and structural characteristics of
an apartment.
Recently, machine learning has been applied to the analysis of
ﬂoor plan images. Yamasaki et al. [5] used deep neural networks
(DNNs) to conduct semantic segmentation of ﬂoor plan images.
They further developed a method to systematically generate ad-
jacency graphs of ﬂoor plans from the semantically segmented
images. Takada et al. [17] utilized multi-task learning for ﬂoor
plan images and retrieved similar ﬂoor plans to the query. The
ﬂoor plan recognition was then applied to property recommen-
dation [18], [19] and retrieval [20]. Additionally, a toolbox for
converting ﬂoor plan images to a vector format was developed
in [21]. Furthermore, generating ﬂoor plans using graphs [22],
[23], panoramic images [24], or 3D scans [25], [26], [27], [28],
[29], [30] is emerging. Generating furniture layouts using graphs
was also discussed in [31].
C. Prediction of Subjective Scores of Multimedia Content
There are extensive surveys in the literature introducing qual-
ity assessment studies and methods using images [32] and
videos [33], [34].
Assessing the perceived low-level quality of images [35], [36],
[37], [38] and videos [39], [40], [41], [42] has been an important
topic in multimedia. These works tried to predict the perceived
quality when the quality of the multimedia content is somewhat
degraded by low-level factors such as compression and noise.
Predicting higher-level subjective scores has also been an ac-
tive research area. For instance, analysis of image aesthetics re-
lates more to color usage, composition, etc., and not to low-level
noise in the content [43], [44], [45], [46], [47], [48]. Sentiment
and emotion classiﬁcation and affective analysis constitute an-
other direction of research for analyzing subjective evaluation
of multimedia content. In this regard, many related works can be
found in the literature for texts [49], [50], [51], images [52], [53],
[54], [55], [56], [57], [58], speech [59], music [60], videos [53],
[61], [62], [63], [64], and their combinations [65], [66], [67].
Skills and creativeness have also been research targets, includ-
ing skill assessment [68], creativity [69], click through rate pre-
diction for online advertisements [70], [71], presentation slide
assessment [72], [73], and so on.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work on subjec-
tive evaluation of apartment ﬂoor plans. In the paper, we show
that predicting the subjective functionality and comfort is pos-
sible, and we also demonstrate potential applications of such
predictions.
III. D ATASET CREATION
A. Subjective Scores
In this study, we used crowdsourcing to create a new dataset
based on subjective evaluation of real estate ﬂoor plan images
through a set of statements that question their levels of comfort,
openness, privacy, and other characteristics.
In total, 3,128 workers participated in this evaluation. We re-
cruited 400 participants separately from ten groups: two genders
Fig. 2. A screenshot of the crowdsourcing page.
over ﬁve age ranges (20-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, and 60+) using
a crowdsourcing service.
We used ﬂoor plan images of Japanese rental apartments from
the “Home’s dataset” released by LIFULL Co., Ltd. with the co-
operation of National Institute of Informatics,2which has been
widely used as a general ﬂoor plan image dataset in the interna-
tional research community [22], [74], [75], [76]. We randomly
selected 1,000 ﬂoor plan images that included apartments with
one, two, three, and four or more bedrooms in balanced propor-
tions and prepared the following nine question statements for
each image (questions Q1 to Q3 are about impressions, Q4 to
Q6 are about functionality, and Q7 to Q9 are about environmen-
tal criteria):rQ1 (Spaciousness): It is a spacious and open ﬂoor plan.rQ2 (Modernity): The impression of the room layout is mod-
ern and contemporary.rQ3 (Luxuriance): It is a luxurious apartment, and the rent
might be expensive.rQ4 (Connectivity): Connectivity, adjacency, and layout of
rooms and circulation are efﬁcient and look comfortable.rQ5 (Wet Areas): The trafﬁc paths for the kitchen, bathroom,
and restroom are good.rQ6 (Storage): Locations and sizes of storage are good.rQ7 (Airﬂow): Airﬂow inside the ﬂoor plan is good.rQ8 (Solar Exp.): Solar exposure of the ﬂoor plan is good.rQ9 (Privacy): The arrangement and adjacency of rooms
fully consider the privacy of each family member.
In Q9, participants were provided a family size to evaluate the
privacy of the image. Each ﬂoor plan was evaluated based on a
ﬁve-grade score on a scale of 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly
agree) by participants. Only the ﬂoor plan images were shown
to participants for the evaluation (Figure 2). Each participant
was asked to evaluate 25 ﬂoor plan images. A task completion
control was implemented, and the participants were required
to answer all the assigned questions in order to complete the
task; otherwise, their responses were not included in the study.
After removing those from whom we did not receive all re-
sponses and also those who chose the same rating for all (i.e.,
2National Institute of Informatics (NII), https://www.nii.ac.jp/dsc/idr/lifull/
homes.html (accessed: 05.05.2020)

===== PAGE 4 =====
6732 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, VOL. 25, 2023
Fig. 3. Histograms of the responses (5-point Likert scale) for several examples
of randomly selected ﬂoor plan images.
“straight-lining”), we obtained 3,128 valid participants’ results
out of the 4,000 participants that were recruited. The remaining
871 include those who either dropped out or were not included
for the reasons stated above. Thus, each ﬂoor plan was eval-
uated by 78 to 80 individuals (i.e., 2 genders ×5 age ranges
×400 participants ×25 images / 1,000 total images =100
participants per image; with approximately 20% drop outs, this
coincides with 3128/4000 =0.782). We veriﬁed that the his-
tograms of responses by participants were approximately nor-
mally distributed from random selections of over 200 ﬂoor plans
and that no isolated peaks with unusual values were found. Fig-
ure 3 shows some examples of histograms from our randomly
selected ﬂoor plans. Each participant would have different mean
and standard deviation in their evaluation scores, and therefore
the scores were standardized before taking the average among
the participants. We used the value obtained by subtracting the
mean value from each raw score and dividing it by the stan-
dard deviation. The resulting scores were normalized between
-1 and 1 for each question. The effect of this standardization is
discussed in Section V-B. Figure 1 shows selected examples of
ﬂoor plans with the corresponding results of the nine scores of
subjective measure. The error bar represents the standard devi-
ation. Next, for each ﬂoor plan, we averaged the scores from
the nine questions. Since we averaged nine scores that origi-
nally came from different populations of scores with different
distributions, we standardized the mean values from all ﬂoor
plans and normalized them between -1 and 1; we called this
value the “Total Score” of the ﬂoor plan. The Total Score repre-
sents the overall performance of each ﬂoor plan across all nine
questions.
B. Segmentation and Graph Extraction
A ﬂoor plan can also be viewed as a graph with nodes repre-
senting rooms and with edges representing connections between
them [5], [20], [22], [23]. Therefore, we extracted graphs from
ﬂoor plan images and used them as features to predict the ninesubjective scores deﬁned above. This is a reasonable assump-
tion because ﬂoor plan images are inspected for the connections
among rooms and their adjacency.
In order to extract corresponding graphs automatically from
ﬂoor plan images, we used the following two steps (Figure 4 top
left). First, we prepared 3,800 new ﬂoor plan images (no over-
lap with dataset A), which we call dataset B, with their manu-
ally annotated segmented images using an online annotation tool
(please see Figure 4). They were consistently color-coded and se-
mantically segmented into the following 15 classes of elements:
wall, western bedroom (wbed), Japanese bedroom (jbed), dining
kitchen (dk), restroom (wc), bathroom (bath), washroom (wash),
balcony (balc), entrance (ent), corridor (corri), stairs, closet (cl),
door, window, and unknown elements that do not belong to any
category (abbreviations in parentheses are used in ﬁgures rep-
resenting graph nodes). Then, we prepared a segmentation pre-
diction network based on the method introduced in [5] using
an improved network architecture, DeepLab v3+ [77], [78], in-
stead of fully convolutional networks. Using 3,040 images for
training, 380 for validation, and 380 for testing, we trained the
network using the segmented images as ground truth data. We
automatically obtained 1,000 segmented images with subjective
scores for our dataset by feeding dataset A into this pre-trained
network using DeepLab v3+.
Second, we used the rule-based method to extract 1,000
graphs from the inferred segmented images using images in
dataset A following the same procedure in [20]. Figure 5 shows
examples of ﬂoor plan images, inferred segmented images, ex-
tracted graphs, and ground truth (GT) segmented images, which
were manually annotated using an online annotation tool. We
used 11 elements for nodes of the graphs, excluding the wall,
door, window, and unknown elements from the above 15 el-
ements. We added edges between two rooms only if they are
directly accessible through a physical opening or door. Nodes
were created by extracting regions representing rooms with a
certain area in the inferred segmented images. The resulting
dataset was used to determine whether the differences in graph
structures inﬂuence the impression and functionality of apart-
ments from subjective evaluations.
In Figure 5, it is noticeable that the inferred segmented images
using the segmentation prediction network are noisy and slightly
degraded compared to the GT segmented images. As a result, the
extracted graphs from the inferred images are not as accurate as
the grand truth graphs extracted from the GT segmented images.
In Section V-B, we discuss how the imperfections in the use of
inferred images and extracted graphs affects the prediction accu-
racy of our proposed model compared to the best-case using GT
segmented images and GT graphs as input features as the upper
bound performance. In fact, the average performance drop in
Pearson correlation coefﬁcient (PCC) is only 0.046 between the
two cases, which is statistically insigniﬁcant (see Section V-B).
It is thus acceptable to use the inferred segmented images instead
of GT segmented images, which allows us to automatically gen-
erate all required features only from ﬂoor plan images without
preparing manually annotated ﬂoor plan images for new data
inputs.

===== PAGE 5 =====
NARAHARA AND YAMASAKI: SUBJECTIVE FUNCTIONALITY AND COMFORT PREDICTION 6733
Fig. 4. Overview of our framework.
Fig. 5. Examples of input images (ﬁrst column on the left), inferred semanti-
cally segmented images (second column), extracted graphs (third column), and
grand truth segmented images (forth column).
C. Overview of Our Datasets
Figure 4 shows an overview of our framework. To predict
subjective scores only from the real-estate ﬂoor plan images, we
prepared three sets of ﬂoor plan images without any overlaps to
avoid bias for network models’ training.
The ﬁrst set of 1,000 images (dataset A) was used for the
dataset with subjective scores and to train our prediction model
in Section IV.
The second set with 3,800 images (dataset B) was used to
obtain the network that outputs segmented images from the
ﬂoor plan images as input, which as explained in Section III-B.
We also used dataset B to train an ImageNet-pretrained feature
extractor network using color-coded semantically segmented
images, as shown in bottom left of Figure 4. We additionally
developed this network since our proposed network in Figure 8
explained in Section IV-C shows improved performance using
the new weights ﬁne-tuned by this network for ResNet50 [79]
instead of using the weights only pre-trained on ImageNet on
segmented images. The network was based on ResNet50 and
used the segmented image as input. It was pre-trained ﬁrst usingImageNet and then ﬁne-tuned for the multi-task classiﬁcation
task to predict the number of rooms of the 13 room types,
excluding the wall and unknown elements, from the 15 types
deﬁned in Section III-B.
Finally, we predicted subjective scores using our model from
a separate set of 1,535 ﬂoor plan images (hereafter, “dataset C”;
please see Figure 4), and it was also used for our proposed apart-
ment search tool in Section VI.
IV . P ROPOSED METHODS
In this section, we introduce our prediction model. We propose
to use two types of inputs for the model: ﬂoor plan images and
structured data features. For the images, we used both ﬂoor plan
images and semantically segmented images from Section III. In
Section IV-A, we explain our method to extract four features
from the structured data based on graphs and metadata of ﬂoor
plans. The image features are described in Section IV-B. In Sec-
tion IV-C, we introduce our prediction model in detail.
A. Features
1) Emerging Subgraphs: To extract frequently appearing
common subgraphs that are very important and contribute to
either higher or lower evaluation scores for each question re-
garding the ﬂoor plans, we ﬁrst performed frequent subgraph
mining on a total of 1,000 graphs in dataset A using graph-based
substructure pattern mining (gSpan) [80]. For the condition to
evaluate subgraph isomorphism, we considered node attributes
that represent the room types for graph matching. The edge at-
tributes that represent door and window types were not consid-
ered. As a result, 162,470 subgraphs were extracted by setting
the minimum support threshold to 5 (i.e., the condition for ex-
tracting the common subgraph corresponding to at least ﬁve out
of 1,000). The following three steps were further performed to
extract subgraphs that are more relevant to each subjective score.
Step 1: For each question from Q1 to Q9 and the “Total Score”
from Section III-A (ten items in total), common subgraphs that
were included in the ﬂoor plan graphs with evaluation scores
of the top and bottom 10% were extracted and separated into a
total of 20 classes. We further narrowed down the selection of
subgraphs by setting the following three thresholding strategies.

===== PAGE 6 =====
6734 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, VOL. 25, 2023
Fig. 6. Examples of emerging subgraphs frequently found in ﬂoor plans having
a high Q2 (modernity) score (top row). The top left also appears in Figure 1 a
(circled in red). Examples found in ﬂoor plans having a low Q4 (connectivity)
(bottom left & middle) and a Q9 (privacy) score (bottom right).
First, the minimum support threshold was set to 10. Second, the
average score of the apartments that contain the target subgraph
should be 0.25 or larger for those in the top 10% classes and
−0.25or lower for those in the bottom 10% classes. Third, we
also used the growth rate (GR), which is widely used for discov-
ering discriminative patterns in emerging pattern mining [81].
The ratio between GR for the top 10% and that for the bottom
10% should be larger than 4 or smaller than 1/4. These thresh-
olds were set by our empirical study.
Step 2: To further extract relevant common subgraphs in the
above 20 classes, we considered identiﬁcation numbers of ex-
tracted subgraphs as “words” in 20 different “documents.” Then,
we performed term frequency - inverse document frequency
(TF-IDF), which evaluates how relevant a word (subgraph) is
to a document (class) in a collection of documents (classes that
represent each question). Based on the obtained TF-IDF weights,
we sorted important subgraphs that are relevant to the top or bot-
tom 10% of ﬂoor plans evaluated based on a speciﬁc question
in each class. The use of TF-IDF helped eliminate frequently
appearing subgraphs found in multiple classes that are not yet
relevant to any speciﬁc class.
For any subgraph that included other subgraphs (i.e., inclusion
dependency) within the same class, subgraphs with a minimum
number of nodes were always kept. If the larger-size subgraph
in the top 10% class has a larger mean evaluation score than
those of the minimum-size subgraphs deﬁned above, it is also
kept (and vice-versa for the bottom 10% classes).
Step 3: We sorted all the extracted subgraphs from the previ-
ous steps based on the mean evaluation score in each class and
obtained the top 20 subgraphs for each of the 20 classes. By
eliminating duplicates that appeared in multiple classes from
a total of 400 extracted emerging subgraphs, we obtained 230
unique emerging subgraphs. For each ﬂoor plan in the dataset,
a 230-dimensional feature vector that contained 0 or 1 based
on the absence or presence of 230 emerging subgraphs, respec-
tively, were extracted.
Figure 6 shows examples of the emerging subgraphs that were
extracted using the above three steps. The subgraph on the top
Fig. 7. The main ﬁve types of subgraphs for wet areas that make up 76% of all
ﬂoor plans. Two subgraphs that include the linkage (wc)-(wash)-(bath), circled
in red, have lower mean scores for Q5 (wet areas) than the others.
left is a triangle graph connecting (wbed)-(dk)-(balc) as a sub-
graph that appears in the top 10% of the Q2 (modernity) class.
For example, the ﬂoor plan in Figure 1 a includes this subgraph
and has a very high evaluation score for Q2. It represents the wide
balcony space that is open to both the bedroom and kitchen and is
often considered a contemporary layout among Japanese apart-
ments (advertised as a “wide-span balcony”). The subgraph with
two nodes, (dk)-(bath), was in the class representing the bottom
10% of the Q4 (adjacency and connectivity) class (bottom left in
Figure 6). This has a bathroom door that immediately opens to a
living room, allowing anyone to enter a communal space directly
after taking a bath, which is not considered desirable. Adding a
washing room between the two nodes is a common practice in
Japan, as it provides a room to change clothes before entering
the bathroom. This subgraph was also included in the class for
the bottom 10% for the Q9 (privacy) class. Our method was able
to extract emerging subgraphs representing such characteristics
of ﬂoor plans in 20 classes.
2) Subgraphs for Wet Areas: Wet areas are particularly im-
portant because they are more personal spaces. Therefore, spe-
cial attention was paid to them. For each ﬂoor plan in dataset A, a
connected subgraph containing rooms related to the usage of wa-
ter, including dining kitchen (dk), washroom (wash), bathroom
(bath), and restroom (wc), was extracted. Any nodes bridging
the above four nodes such as a corridor (corri) that were neces-
sary to form a single connected subgraph that contained all four
of the above nodes were also included depending on the ﬂoor
plan layouts. If there were more than two such bridging nodes
and only one node was sufﬁcient to form a connected subgraph,
the node that served a communal use or as circulation, such as

===== PAGE 7 =====
NARAHARA AND YAMASAKI: SUBJECTIVE FUNCTIONALITY AND COMFORT PREDICTION 6735
corridor, was selected over a node use for a private purpose,
such as a bedroom. In total, 162 unique subgraph types for
water-related rooms were extracted. Out of all the ﬂoor plans,
76% belonged to the ﬁve types. 120 types of subgraph appeared
only once and therefore they were discarded. As a result, 42
subgraph types were used in this study.
Two out of the ﬁve remaining types of subgraphs included
three nodes that were directly linked: (wc)-(wash)-(bath). How-
ever, this is not a desirable layout, as its circulation paths for
(wc) and (bath) crisscross at the washing room (Figure 7). It
forces one to enter (wash) while someone else is still present
after using either room. The mean evaluation scores for Q5 (wet
areas) for those two types were lower (0.171 and 0.208) than the
mean scores from the other three types (0.330, 0.296, and 0.249).
As a result, we extracted a 42-dimensional one-hot feature vec-
tor based on the presence of the 42 types of subgraphs for wet
areas.
3) Feature Based on MCS Graph Similarity: The similar-
ity between graphs of all 800 ﬂoor plans in the training set of
dataset A was calculated based on the method described in [17],
[82], [83] using the maximum common subgraph (MCS) as a
graph similarity measure. The similarity was 1 when the two
graphs perfectly matched, and 0 when there were no com-
mon parts. Any input graph could be expressed by an 800-
dimensional vector that represents distances from each of the
800 graphs in the training set of the dataset A. We used this
vector based on the MCS similarity to extract a feature that rep-
resented an entire (global) characteristic of each apartment, as
opposed to a local sub-structure from a subgraph.
4) Feature Based on Metadata: In addition to the above three
features extracted from graph structures, we listed areas and
numbers of room types using the metadata for each ﬂoor plan.
This resulted in 30-dimensional feature vectors that represented
the areas and numbers of room types.
From the above, we obtained four feature vectors that repre-
sented structured data based on emerging subgraphs, subgraphs
for wet areas, MCS graph similarity, and metadata. All feature
vectors were standardized before using them for machine learn-
ing (see the next section) such that their distributions had a mean
value of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
B. Image Features
We also fed the network two types of images: ﬂoor plan
images and consistently color-coded semantically segmented
images (prepared for the automated graph generation in Sec-
tion III). The inputs to the network were two sets of RGB images
of resolution 224×224.
First, for the ﬂoor plan images, using ResNet50 [79] pre-
trained on ImageNet [84], a 2,048-dimensional vector of the
pool5 layer was extracted from deep features of the images.
Then, a new fully connected (FC) layer was added in place of
the original one.
Second, for the segmented images, we used the same net-
work architecture, but the network was pre-trained ﬁrst using
ImageNet and then ﬁne-tuned for the multi-task classiﬁcation
task to predict the number of rooms of the 13 room types, ex-
cluding walls and unknown elements, from the 15 types deﬁned
Fig. 8. Proposed network architecture.
in Section III-B. Similarly, a 2,048-dimensional vector of the
pool5 layer was extracted.
Two features extracted from the two sets of images described
above were also added in the same manner as above, followed by
the FC, batch normalization (BN) [85], and dropout [86] layers.
Finally, these two added features from the structured data and
images were added again, followed by the FC and dropout layers.
The ﬁnal FC layer generated a value predicting the score (see
Figure 8 for details). For the FC layers, we used Leaky ReLu
[89] as an activation function.
C. Prediction Model
Figure 8 shows our proposed network architecture to predict
the evaluation scores from Q1 to Q9 and the “Total Score” (ten
separate models in total).
Two features based on emerging subgraphs (IV-A1) and sub-
graphs for wet areas (IV-A2) were concatenated into one 272-
dimensional vector, which was reduced to 256 dimensions using
a FC layer. The 800-dimensional feature vector from the MCS
graph similarity (IV-A3) and the 30-dimensional feature based
on metadata, such as areas and numbers of room types (IV-A4),
were also reduced to 256 dimensions using FC layers. Then, the
above three input features were added, followed by the FC, BN,
and dropout layers. The latter two layers were added to improve
generalization and to reduce overﬁtting.
V. E XPERIMENTS
We used the dataset created in Section III and divided it
into 800 ﬂoor plans for training, 100 for validation, and 100
for testing. We trained ten separate models for predicting ten
scores using the network in Section IV-C because it is better
than multi-task learning using a single model in our preliminary
experiment. Regression models were created for each using the
mean squared error (MSE) as a loss function, and we trained
these networks using 800 training images. We applied the Mo-
mentum Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) algorithm to train

===== PAGE 8 =====
6736 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, VOL. 25, 2023
models with a batch size of 20, a learning rate of 10−3, a de-
cay rate of 2.86×10−5, and a momentum of 0.9 for the 35
epochs. The system was implemented using Keras.3We applied
the pearson correlation coefﬁcient (PCC) to measure the correla-
tion between the predicted values and the evaluation scores from
the dataset as ground truths for 100 ﬂoor plans in the test data.
We also used the root-mean-squared error (RMSE) to evaluate
the performance. We repeated the above process ﬁve times using
a different randomly selected set of 800 training, 100 validation,
and 100 test ﬂoor plans each time, and used the mean values of
all ﬁve results as the ﬁnal PCCs for the proposed as well as the
following comparative baseline models, which were prepared to
compare and verify the prediction results.
A. Baseline Methods
As baseline methods, we prepared the following seven mod-
els, of which ﬁve models use DNNs by subtracting one of ﬁve
input features from the proposed network in Figure 8:rImages Only: The model with only two input features based
on ﬂoor plans and color-coded semantically segmented im-
ages.rw/o SubG: The model without the input features based on
subgraphs for emerging (IV-A1) and for wet areas (IV-A2).rw/o MCS: The model without the input features based on
MCS graph similarity (IV-A3).rw/o Meta: The model without the input features based on
metadata such as area and number of room types (IV-A4).rw/o Img: The model without the features for ﬂoor plan
images.rw/o Segm: The model without the input features based on
consistently color-coded semantically segmented images.rUpper Bound: The model’s network architecture is identi-
cal to the proposed model. However, the dataset based on
GT segmented images and GT graphs was used for training
and testing of the model as the best case, instead of using
inferred segmented images and extracted graphs used in
our proposed model explained in Section III-B)
B. Results
1) Segmentation Performance: First, we discuss the accu-
racy of the semantic segmentation using dataset B introduced
in III-B. The number of train/validation/test data were set to
3040/380/380, respectively, and we trained the segmentation
prediction network model to learn the correspondence between
the ﬂoor plan images and the GT label masks using the train-
ing and validation data. After the training, the test data was
used for evaluation with a metric mean intersection over union
(IoU) [87] deﬁned by (1), where ncis the number of classes,
tiis the total number of pixels belonging to class i, and
njis the total number of predicted as class jbelonging to
class i.
mean IoU =1
ncnc∑
i=1nii
ti+∑nc
i′=1ni′i−nii. (1)
3[Online]. Available:https://keras.ioThe mean IoU for the test data was 82.1%, and the average
mean accuracy was 89.0% for the test set. Although the seg-
mentation accuracy is not perfect, it is acceptable considering
the prediction accuracy of functionality and comfort prediction
as discussed below.
2) Performance Comparison: To evaluate the performance
of each model, we used two metrics, namely PCC and RMSE.
Table I shows the PCC results of both the proposed and baseline
models using the test set of dataset A, and Table II shows the
RMSE values. Note that a higher PCC and a lower RMSE mean
better prediction performance. Our proposed model, which uses
all features extracted from the structured data, ﬂoor plan im-
ages, and segmented images, outperformed all the comparative
baseline models in terms of the mean value of PCCs from all
ten criteria (0.701) and recorded the highest PCC for nine out of
ten criteria (Table I). While we used ResNet50, which is known
for its high performance in a wide range of image-recognition
tasks, the naive approach only using two sets of images, The
Images Only model, has a lower mean value of PCCS, 0.491.
Therefore, it can be inferred that the network compensates for
the weakness of each feature by combining them. The PCC val-
ues for our proposed model were over 0.7 for ﬁve criteria (Q1 =
0.721, Q2 =0.793, Q3 =0.776, Q6 =0.751, and Total Score
=0.794), and over 0.8 for the “privacy” criteria (Q9 =0.816).
Table II also shows that our proposed model outperforms base-
line models with the lowest mean value of RMSEs from all ten
criteria.
We carried out the statistical signiﬁcance tests to determine
whether PCCs and RMSEs between the proposed and baseline
models are statistically signiﬁcant or not. Following the recom-
mended procedure in Section 7.6.1 of ITU-T Rec. P.1401 [88],
the statistical signiﬁcance tests for PCC use statistics derived
from Fisher’s z-transformed correlation coefﬁcients in each
comparison, compared with the 95% two-tailed Student’s t-test
critical value. In Table I, we have used an asterisk to denote
the case when 0.05 signiﬁcance level of difference compared to
the proposed model’s PCC is found. Table III shows p-values
from Images Only and Upper Bound models. Our multimodal
network model outperformed the Images Only model with p-
values >0.05 in eight out of ten criteria (all criteria except for
Q5 and Q8) (Table III).
The statistical signiﬁcance tests for the differences in RMSEs
were also performed, following the recommended procedure in
Section 7.6.4 of ITU-T Rec. P.1401 [88]. In Table II, we have
used an asterisk to the RMSE values to denote the case when sig-
niﬁcant differences between the proposed model’s RMSEs are
found. The RMSEs from our proposed model and the Images
Only model were signiﬁcantly different in eight out of ten cri-
teria (all criteria except for Q5 and Total Score), indicating that
the improvements using our multimodal network are statistically
signiﬁcant. Only Q5 (Wet Areas) does not show signiﬁcant im-
provement using our model suggested by the differences in both
PCC and RMSE values. As stated in Section IV-A2, subgraphs
for wet areas have fewer pattern variations than other features,
which may make prediction of the Q5 (Wet Areas) score more
difﬁcult. The test also suggests that our model is statistically
signiﬁcantly better than the model without the features for ﬂoor

===== PAGE 9 =====
NARAHARA AND YAMASAKI: SUBJECTIVE FUNCTIONALITY AND COMFORT PREDICTION 6737
TABLE I
PREDICTION ACCURACY COMPARISON .VALUES ARE IN TERMS OF PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS (PCC). B LACK CELLS REPRESENT PCC>0.7 AND GRAY
CELLS INDICATE PCC<0.7. S TATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE BETWEEN PROPOSED AND BASELINE MODELS WEREDETERMINED BY A T-T EST
TABLE II
ROOT-MEAN-SQUARED ERROR (RMSE) C OMPARISON
TABLE III
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE DIFFERENCE IN PCC SCOMPARED TO THE PROPOSED
MODEL ’SPCC S.VALUES ARE IN TERMS OF P-V ALUES
plan images, w/o Img, in ﬁve out of ten criteria, including Q1,
Q3, Q5, Q7, and Q8. The results indicate that the use of both fea-
tures based on images and structured data extracted from graphs
contributes to the improvement in prediction accuracy.
The differences in PCC and RMSE values between the pro-
posed and Upper Bound models are not signiﬁcant, indicating
that the performance drops caused by the use of graphs extracted
from inferred segmented images, instead of the GT graphs de-
scribed in Section III-B, are not signiﬁcant (average difference
in PCCs from nine questions is 0.046). Our model can automat-
ically generate all input features from ﬂoor plan images alone
as inputs using the processes in Section III-B to extract seg-
mented images and graphs, allowing us to develop the search
tool described in Section VI without the time-consuming and
labor-intensive manual annotation process for segmented im-
ages. We also tested the prediction accuracy of our proposed
Fig. 9. Success and failure cases from our model’s prediction results. While
both ﬂoor plans in the top row have high ground-truth scores for Q2 Modernity
in our dataset, the prediction error for the top-left was lower than the prediction
error for the top-right, indicating a more successful prediction result.
network architecture trained and tested using a dataset based on
raw values rated by the participants as evaluation scores, instead
of using standardized evaluation scores in our dataset explained
in Section III-A. We found no statistically signiﬁcant difference
in PCC and RMSE values between the two datasets (i.e., average
PCC was 0.699 using raw score values and 0.701 using ours).
3) Success and Failure: Figure 9 depicts some success and
failure examples from our prediction results for Q2 Modernity
scores. Here, “success” means that the prediction error between
the predicted score and the ground-truth score from the dataset is

===== PAGE 10 =====
6738 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, VOL. 25, 2023
Fig. 10. The proposed apartment search tool.
lower. It is inferred that if similar ﬂoor layouts are included in the
proposed network’s training data, prediction errors would likely
be reduced. If the ﬂoor plans are rare or uncommon examples that
do not exist in the training set, prediction errors could increase.
In conclusion, although the measurement of the functionality
of ﬂoor plans is a very subjective problem, our proposed predic-
tion models are able to achieve a very strong correlation with
human evaluation.
VI. A PPLICATION TO ONLINE PROPERTY SEARCH
A. Implementation
We introduce a new interface for an apartment search tool
that implements functionality and comfort as query items. In
addition to a common search interface based on user selection
of the number of bedrooms and a range of areas, our tool offers
importance sliders with adjustable weights for importance in
three levels: 0 (none); ×1(important); and ×2(very important),
for nine subjective criteria (see Figure 10). After a user presses
the search button, the tool calculates the scores for all ﬂoor plans
based on the weighted sum of the predicted subjective values
using the information from the sliders, and displays the scores
in ranked order. This feature allows a user to search apartments
based on a controlled weighted priority for qualitative criteria
(i.e., extremely spacious apartments with sufﬁcient privacy and
storage spaces).
For our proposed search tool’s ﬂoor plan database, we
prepared a new set of 1,535 ﬂoor plan images that include
apartments with one, two, three, and four or more bedrooms inbalanced proportions (dataset C). These images were completely
unbiased and were not previously used in this study. Using the
pre-trained network using DeepLab v3+ and the rule-based
method in Section III-B, we obtained the 1,535 corresponding
segmented images and graphs. Next, we executed the procedures
outlined in Sections IV-A and IV-B to extract the ﬁve features
from these images, which were then used to obtain the predicted
attractiveness scores for the nine criteria for each of the 1,535
ﬂoor plans using the best model (i.e., the one with the highest
PCC) from the proposed network introduced in Section IV-C.
B. Procedure
We evaluated our method through a large-scale user study.
Among the 200 participants recruited through a crowdsourcing
service, we removed three who chose the same rating for all
questions (i.e., “straight-lining”) and another six who did not
complete the survey to obtain a ﬁnal count of 191 participants
with a wide variety of attributes. Out of the 191 participants, 81
identiﬁed themselves as male and 109 as female. The numbers of
participants in their 20 s, 30 s, 40 s, 50 s, and over 60 were 30, 78,
53, 20, and 4, respectively. Of the total, 38 lived alone at the time
of the experiment, while 81 participants were married. While
115 lived in urban areas, 60 lived in suburban areas, and 11 in
rural areas. Participants were required to answer all questions to
complete the task. Incomplete responses were not included in
the study. We veriﬁed that all histograms of responses for 5-point
Likert scale questions were approximately normally distributed,
and that no isolated peaks with unusual values were found.
To make the study task realistic and provide internal motiva-
tion, we prepared hypothetical scenarios with different demands
from ﬁve unique families and asked participants to search ﬁve
apartments for each scenario. We set the scenarios based on
ﬁve completely different family structures to avoid demographic
background bias of the participants.r“You are a married couple, and your two children need
their own rooms soon. You want a functional ﬂoor plan
layout and don’t want to pay extra for unnecessarily large
spaces.”r“You are a family of ﬁve, living with one child and your
spouse’s parents. A well-functioning home with large stor-
age spaces, kitchen, and wet areas are your top priority
since you have a big family.”r“Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, you have been working
from home and would like to have your own study room.
You and your spouse want to have separate rooms to respect
each other’s privacy.”r“You live with your signiﬁcant other before marriage and
would like to share a large spacious room with your partner
and stay together as much as possible.”r“You and your partner are a young couple and hope to have
at least one child in the future. You prefer to have a large
balcony for your family to spend the weekend together.”
We assigned these tasks using both our proposed tool and
another baseline tool. The baseline tool represented commonly
available real estate portal sites without our proposed features,

===== PAGE 11 =====
NARAHARA AND YAMASAKI: SUBJECTIVE FUNCTIONALITY AND COMFORT PREDICTION 6739
TABLE IV
THEDIRECT COMPARISON QUESTIONS WEREASKED ON A 5-POINT LIKERT
SCALE .AH IGHER SCORE INDICATED A PREFERENCE FOR OURPROPOSED
TOOL,WHILE A LOWER SCORE INDICATED A PREFERENCE FOR THE BASELINE
TOOL.AS CORE OF 3INDICATED NOPREFERENCE
featuring a search interface for a user to select the number of bed-
rooms and a range of areas. We studied major real estate portal
sites4567, and found the above two items as common search fea-
tures. The differences between the proposed and baseline tool
are that the baseline tool has an identical interface except that
it does not have functionality- and comfort-related options. As
we wanted participants to focus on analyzing information only
readable from ﬂoor plans to enable a fair comparison with our
proposed tool, we excluded other common search features based
on the location and cost of properties. The study employed a
within-participant design in which participants used both tools
(counterbalanced across participants) and provided feedback on
them.
Participants were asked to search ﬁve apartments that met
needs of each of the ﬁve scenarios using one tool, and then switch
to the other tool for the same search (with the order of tool coun-
terbalanced across participants). After completing both search
tasks, participants completed a post-experiment survey. The sur-
vey asked participants to directly compare their experience with
the proposed tool to the baseline tool in ﬁve Likert-scale ques-
tions (shown in Table IV). We also asked them to rate 50 se-
lected ﬂoor plans (i.e., ﬁve plans ×ﬁve scenarios ×two tools)
in a ﬁve-grade score on a scale of 1 (very unsatisﬁed) to 5 (very
satisﬁed) (i.e., each participant gave a score of 1 to 5 for each
retrieved ﬂoor plan image.).
C. Results
Overall, it can be observed that the participants showed a
signiﬁcant preference for our proposed tool in response to all ﬁve
direct comparison questions in Table IV. For each question, 95%
conﬁdent intervals of mean scores are indicated. In addition, a
one-sample one-tailed t-test (p <0.05) was used to evaluate
whether the mean responses are greater than 3 (i.e., a score of
3 indicates no preference) at the signiﬁcance level. Participants
appreciated the proposed tool as well. Compared to the baseline
tool, it helped them ﬁnd signiﬁcantly more desirable ﬂoor plans
4[Online]. Available:https://lifull.com
5[Online]. Available:https://www.livable.co.jp
6[Online]. Available:https://suumo.jp
7[Online]. Available:https://www.redﬁn.comTABLE V
THE5-G RADE RATINGS OF ALLFLOOR PLANS SELECTED BY PARTICIPANTS
USING TWOMETHODS
(M=4.03, 95% CI[3.90, 4.17], p =4.9×10−34<0.001), and
gave them a signiﬁcantly more enjoyable experience (M =3.97,
95% CI[3.83, 4.11], p =1.92×10−30<0.001).
Even though the participants spent a longer average time to
complete a search task using the proposed tool (M =158.0 s,
median =131 s, SD =105.7 s) than the baseline tool (M =
129.0 s, median =105 s, SD =97.4 s), the result from the direct
comparison question shows that participants felt that they found
the desired ﬂoor plans faster using the proposed tool (M =3.84,
95% CI[3.67, 4.01], p =1.1×10−18<0.001). The number of
clicks on buttons per search increased using the proposed tool (M
=18.3, median =17, SD =7.6) compared to the baseline tool
(M=13.2, median =12, SD =5.9). These results show that our
proposed tool required more time and mouse clicks for users due
to additional features that are not included in the baseline tool
(e.g., importance sliders). However, these additional features did
not lead them to believe that the proposed system is harder to use.
Participants felt that the proposed tool made the task signiﬁcantly
easier (M =3.76, 95% CI[3.60, 3.93], p =2.5×10−16<0.001)
and more intuitive (M =3.43, 95% CI[3.25, 3.62], p =7.0×
10−6<0.001). The longer search time and additional operations
did not make them feel burdened with tasks, and they preferred
the proposed tool over the baseline one.
In Table V, the 5-grade ratings of all ﬂoor plans selected
by participants also indicated that they were signiﬁcantly more
satisﬁed with their selections using the proposed tool than
the baseline one (M(proposed) =4.01, M(baseline) =3.75,
p=1.67×10−40<0.001). To compute the p-value, we used an
independent two-sample one-tailed t-test, and the mean score for
selected ﬂoor plans by participants using our proposed tool was
found to be signiﬁcantly higher than the mean score for selected
ﬂoor plans using the baseline tool.
VII. L IMITATIONS
One limitation of our work is that predicted functionality and
comfort scores do not come with explanations. People may have
different opinions and viewpoints on such subjective scores, and
visualizing how the system evaluates ﬂoor plan images would
be preferred.
Our proposed method has been applied only to apartment
ﬂoor plans in Japan. As can be seen in the ﬁgures, the drawing
styles employed in the ﬂoor plan images are very diverse; how-
ever, the style employed in other counties may be more distinct.
Therefore, the prediction model will need to be trained for each
country. We expect that our segmentation and functionality and
comfort prediction models can be used as pre-trained models for
ﬁne-tuning, but this is left as a future work.

===== PAGE 12 =====
6740 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, VOL. 25, 2023
VIII. C ONCLUSION
We created and analyzed a large-scale dataset based on sub-
jective evaluation of real estate ﬂoor plan images using crowd-
sourcing. Our proposed methods for extracting features from
graph structures and images of ﬂoor plans proved to be effec-
tive, as we obtained functionality and comfort prediction models
with relatively high accuracy (PCC =0.701) for very subjective
scores, which is essentially different from conventional image
recognition tasks where the answer is apparent to all the evalu-
ators. This study is the ﬁrst work to propose a highly accurate
prediction model for dwelling functionality and comfort using
machine learning. We applied the results of the prediction model
to our new apartment search tool using functionality and comfort
as query items, and our user study showed that our tool could
provide a better user experience.
REFERENCES
[1] V . James, S. Wu, A. Gelfand, and C. Sirmans, “Apartment rent prediction
using spatial modeling,” J. Real Estate Res. , vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 105–136,
2005.
[2] O. Poursaeed, T. Matera, and S. Belongie, “Vision-based real estate price
estimation,” Mach. Vis. Appl. , vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 667–676, 2018.
[3] M. Heidari, S. Zad, and S. Rafatirad, “Ensemble of supervised and
unsupervised learning models to predict a proﬁtable business decision,”
inProc. IEEE Int. IOT, Electron. Mechatronics Conf. , 2021, pp. 1–6.
[4] H. Seya and D. Shiroi, “A comparison of residential apartment rent price
predictions using a large data set: Kriging versus deep neural network,”
Geograph. Anal. , vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 239–260, 2022.
[5] T. Yamasaki, J. Zhang, and Y . Takada, “Apartment structure estimation
using fully convolutional networks and graph model,” in Proc. ACM
Workshop Multimedia Real Estate Tech. , 2018, pp. 1–6.
[6] S. Law, B. Paige, and C. Russell, “Take a look around: Using street view
and satellite images to estimate house prices,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst.
Technol. , vol. 10, no. 5, Sep. 2019, Art. no. 54.
[7] M. Zeppelzauer, M. Despotovic, M. Sakeena, D. Koch, and M. Döller,
“Automatic prediction of building age from photographs,” in Proc. ACM
Int. Conf. Multimedia Retrieval , 2018, pp. 126–134.
[8] J. H. Bappy, J. R. Barr, N. Srinivasan, and A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, “Real
estate image classiﬁcation,” in Proc. IEEE Winter Conf. Appl. Comput.
Vis., 2017, pp. 373–381.
[9] X. Wang, Y . Takada, Y . Kado, and T. Yamasaki, “Predicting the attractive-
ness of real-estate images by pairwise comparison using deep learning,”
inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo Workshops , 2019, pp. 84–89.
[10] T. Hanazato, Y . Hirano, and M. Sasaki, “Syntactic analysis of large-size
condominium units supplied in the Tokyo metropolitan area,” J. Architec-
ture Plan. , no. 591, pp. 9–16, 2005.
[11] A. Takizawa, K. Yoshida, and N. Katoh, “Applying graph mining to rent
analysis considering room layouts,” J. Environ. Eng. (Trans. AIJ) , vol. 73,
no. 623, pp. 139–146, 2008.
[12] R. Hattori, K. Okamoto, and A. Shibata, “Visualizing the importance of
ﬂoor-plan image features in rent-prediction models,” in Proc. Joint 11th
Int. Conf. Soft Comput. Intell. Syst. 21st Int. Symp. Adv. Intell. Syst. , 2020,
pp. 1–3.
[13] R. Hattori, K. Okamoto, and A. Shibata, “Impact analysis of ﬂoor-plan
images for rent-prediction model,” J. Jpn. Soc. Fuzzy Theory Intell.
Informat. , vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 640–650, 2021.
[14] K. Solovev and N. Pröllochs, “Integrating ﬂoor plans into hedonic models
for rent price appraisal,” in Proc. Web Conf. , 2021, pp. 2838–2847.
[15] G. Csurka, C. Bray, C. Dance, and L. Fan, “Visual categorization with
bags of keypoints,” Proc. Workshop Stat. Learn. Comput. Vis. , 2004,
pp. 1–22.
[16] S. Sirmans, D. Macpherson, and E. Zietz, “The composition of hedonic
pricing models,” J. Real Estate Literature , vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1–44,
2005.
[17] Y . Takada, N. Inoue, T. Yamasaki, and K. Aizawa, “Similar ﬂoor plan
retrieval featuring multi-task learning of layout type classiﬁcation and
room presence prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Consum. Electron. ,
2018, pp. 1–6.[18] K. Naoki, Y . Toshihiko, A. Kiyoharu, and O. Takemi, “Users’ pref-
erence prediction of real estates featuring ﬂoor plan analysis using
ﬂoornet,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Multimedia Real Estate Tech. , 2018,
pp. 7–11.
[19] N. Kato, T. Yamasaki, K. Aizawa, and T. Ohama, “Users’ preference
prediction of real estate properties based on ﬂoor plan analysis,” IEICE
Trans. Inf. Syst. , vol. E103-D, no. 2, pp. 398–405, 2020.
[20] M. Yamada, X. Wang, and T. Yamasaki, “Graph structure extraction from
ﬂoor plan images and its application to similar property retrieval,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Consum. Electron. , 2021, pp. 1–5.
[21] V . Trinh and R. Manduchi, “Semantic interior mapology: A toolbox for
indoor scene description from architectural ﬂoor plans,” in Proc. 24th Int.
Conf. 3D Web Technol., 2019, doi: 10.1145/3329714.3338141 .
[22] N. Nauata, K.-H. Chang, C.-Y . Cheng, G. Mori, and Y . Fu-
rukawa, “House-GAN: Relational generative adversarial networks
for graph-constrained house layout generation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Comput. Vis. , 2020, pp. 162–177.
[23] R. Hu et al., “Graph2plan: Learning ﬂoorplan generation from layout
graphs,” ACM Trans. Graph. , vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 118–121, 2020.
[24] S.-T. Yang et al., “Dula-Net: A dual-projection network for estimating
room layouts from a single RGB panorama,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. , 2019, pp. 3363–3372.
[25] C. Lin, C. Li, and W. Wang, “Floorplan-jigsaw: Jointly estimating scene
layout and aligning partial scans,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis., 2019, pp. 5674–5683.
[26] C. Liu, J. Wu, and Y . Furukawa, “FloorNet: A uniﬁed framework for
ﬂoorplan reconstruction from 3D scans,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis., 2018, pp. 203–219.
[27] C. Lin, C. Li, and W. Wang, “Floorplan-Jigsaw: Jointly estimating scene
layout and aligning partial scans,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. ,
2019, pp. 5674–5683.
[28] J. Chen, C. Liu, J. Wu, and Y . Furukawa, “Floor-SP: Inverse CAD for
ﬂoorplans by sequential room-wise shortest path,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. , 2019, pp. 2661–2670.
[29] Y . Cui et al., “Automatic 3-D reconstruction of indoor environ-
ment with mobile laser scanning point clouds,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics
Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. , vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 3117–3130,
Aug. 2019.
[30] A. Phalak, V . Badrinarayanan, and A. Rabinovich, “Scan2plan: Ef-
ﬁcient ﬂoorplan generation from 3D scans of indoor scenes,” 2020,
arXiv:2003.07356 .
[31] K. Wang et al., “Planit: Planning and instantiating indoor scenes with
relation graph and spatial prior networks,” ACM Trans. Graph. , vol. 38,
no. 4, pp. 1–15, 2019.
[32] G. Zhai and X. Min, “Perceptual image quality assessment: A survey,”
Sci. China Inf. Sci. , vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 1–52, 2020.
[33] X. Min et al., “Screen content quality assessment: Overview, benchmark,
and beyond,” ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 1–36, 2021.
[34] W. Zhou, X. Min, H. Li, and Q. Jiang, “A brief survey on adaptive video
streaming quality assessment,” J. Vis. Commun. Image Representation ,
2022, Art. no. 103526.
[35] Q. Li, W. Lin, J. Xu, and Y . Fang, “Blind image quality assessment using
statistical structural and luminance features,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia ,
vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 2457–2469, Dec. 2016.
[36] Q. Wu et al., “Blind image quality assessment based on rank-order regular-
ized regression,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 2490–2504,
Nov. 2017.
[37] Z. Fan, T. Jiang, and T. Huang, “Active sampling exploiting reliable in-
formativeness for subjective image quality assessment based on pairwise
comparison,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 2720–2735,
Dec. 2017.
[38] H. Hofbauer, F. Autrusseau, and A. Uhl, “Low quality and recognition
of image content,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 24, pp. 3595–3610,
2022.
[39] Y . Li et al., “User-generated video quality assessment: A subjective and
objective study,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , early access, Oct. 29, 2021,
doi:10.1109/TMM.2021.3122347 .
[40] Y . Liu et al., “Video quality assessment with serial dependence
modeling,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 24, pp. 3754–3768, 2022,
doi:10.1109/TMM.2021.3122347 .
[41] J. Gutierrez et al., “Subjective evaluation of visual quality and simulator
sickness of short 360 videos: ITU-T REC,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia ,
vol. 24, pp. 3087–3100, 2021.
[42] P. Lebreton and K. Yamagishi, “Predicting user quitting ratio in adaptive
bitrate video streaming,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 23, pp. 4526–4540,
2021.

===== PAGE 13 =====
NARAHARA AND YAMASAKI: SUBJECTIVE FUNCTIONALITY AND COMFORT PREDICTION 6741
[43] Y . Deng, C. C. Loy, and X. Tang, “Image aesthetic assessment: An exper-
imental survey,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag. , vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 80–106,
Jul. 2017.
[44] G. Guo, H. Wang, C. Shen, Y . Yan, and H.-Y . M. Liao, “Automatic
image cropping for visual aesthetic enhancement using deep neural
networks and cascaded regression,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 20,
no. 8, pp. 2073–2085, Aug. 2018.
[45] V . Hosu, B. Goldlücke, and D. Saupe, “Effective aesthetics prediction
with multi-level spatially pooled features,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. , 2019, pp. 9367–9375.
[46] P. Lv et al., “User-guided personalized image aesthetic assessment based
on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , early access,
Nov. 25, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TMM.2021.3130752 .
[47] H. Zhu, Y . Zhou, L. Li, Y . Li, and Y . Guo, “Learning personalized
image aesthetics from subjective and objective attributes,” IEEE Trans.
Multimedia , early access, Nov. 02, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TMM.2021.31
23468 .
[48] Y . Bai, Z. Zhu, G. Jiang, and H. Sun, “Blind quality assessment of screen
content images via macro-micro modeling of tensor domain dictionary,”
IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 23, pp. 4259–4271, 2021.
[49] X. Lei, X. Qian, and G. Zhao, “Rating prediction based on social sen-
timent from textual reviews,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 18, no. 9,
pp. 1910–1921, Sep. 2016.
[50] F. Chen, R. Ji, J. Su, D. Cao, and Y . Gao, “Predicting microblog senti-
ments via weakly supervised multimodal deep learning,” IEEE Trans.
Multimedia , vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 997–1007, Apr. 2018.
[51] R. Ji, F. Chen, L. Cao, and Y . Gao, “Cross-modality microblog sentiment
prediction via bi-layer multimodal hypergraph learning,” IEEE Trans.
Multimedia , vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1062–1075, Apr. 2019.
[52] X. Lu, Z. Lin, H. Jin, J. Yang, and J. Z. Wang, “Rapid: Rating pictorial
aesthetics using deep learning,” in Proc. Proc. 22nd ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia , 2014, pp. 457–466.
[53] T. Li et al., “Data-driven affective ﬁltering for images and videos,” IEEE
Trans. Cybern. , vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 2336–2349, Oct. 2015.
[54] J. Yang et al., “Visual sentiment prediction based on automatic dis-
covery of affective regions,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 20, no. 9,
pp. 2513–2525, Sep. 2018..
[55] X. Yao et al., “Adaptive deep metric learning for affective image retrieval
and classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 23, pp. 1640–1653,
2021.
[56] S. Ruan et al., “Color enhanced cross correlation net for image senti-
ment analysis,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , early access, Oct. 11, 2021,
doi:10.1109/TMM.2021.3118208 .
[57] Y . Su, W. Zhao, P. Jing, and L. Nie, “Exploiting low-rank latent
Gaussian graphical model estimation for visual sentiment distri-
bution,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , early access, Jan. 06, 2022,
doi:10.1109/TMM.2022.3140892 .
[58] H. Zhang and M. Xu, “Multiscale emotion representation learning for
affective image recognition,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , early access, Jan.
25, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TMM.2022.3144804 .
[59] S. Zhang, S. Zhang, T. Huang, and W. Gao, “Speech emotion recognition
using deep convolutional neural network and discriminant temporal pyra-
mid matching,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 1576–1590,
Jun. 2018.
[60] T. Li and M. Ogihara, “Toward intelligent music information retrieval,”
IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 564–574, Jun. 2006.
[61] G. Irie, T. Satou, A. Kojima, T. Yamasaki, and K. Aizawa, “Affective
audio-visual words and latent topic driving model for realizing movie
affective scene classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 12, no. 6,
pp. 523–535, Oct. 2010.
[62] R. Teixeira, T. Yamasaki, and K. Aizawa, “Affective determination of
video clips by low level audiovisual features -A dimensional and categorial
approach,” Multimedia Tools Appl. , vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 21–49, 2011.
[63] M. Soleymani, M. Pantic, and T. Pun, “Multimodal emotion recognition
in response to videos,” IEEE Trans. Affect. Comput. , vol. 3, no. 2,
pp. 211–223, Apr.–Jun. 2012.
[64] T. Liu et al., “Sentiment recognition for short annotated GIFs us-
ing visual-textual fusion,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 22, no. 4,
pp. 1098–1110, Apr. 2020.
[65] Q. Fang, C. Xu, J. Sang, M. S. Hossain, and G. Muhammad,
“Word-of-mouth understanding: Entity-centric multimodal aspect-opinion
mining in social media,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 17, no. 12,
pp. 2281–2296, Dec. 2015.[66] W. Guo et al., “LD-Man: Layout-driven multimodal attention network
for online news sentiment recognition,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 23,
pp. 1785–1798, 2021.
[67] W. Nie, R. Chang, M. Ren, Y . Su, and A. Liu, “I-GCN: Incremen-
tal graph convolution network for conversation emotion detection,”
IEEE Trans. Multimedia , vol. 23, pp. 1785–1798, Oct. 8, 2021,
doi:10.1109/TMM.2021.3118881 .
[68] D. Liu et al., “Towards uniﬁed surgical skill assessment,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. , 2021, pp. 9517–9526.
[69] M. Redi, N. O’Hare, R. Schifanella, M. Trevisiol, and A. Jaimes, “6
seconds of sound and vision: Creativity in micro-videos,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. , 2014, pp. 4272–4279.
[70] B. Xia, X. Wang, T. Yamasaki, K. Aizawa, and H. Seshime, “Deep neural
network-based click-through rate prediction using multimodal features of
online banners,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Multimedia Big Data , 2019,
pp. 162–170.
[71] J. Ikeda, H. Seshime, X. Wang, and T. Yamasaki, “25th international
conference on pattern recognition (ICPR),” in Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Pattern
Recognit. , 2021, pp. 2995–3002.
[72] S. Oyama and T. Yamasaki, “Visual clarity analysis and improvement
support for presentation slides,” in Proc. IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Multimedia
Big Data , 2019, pp. 421–428.
[73] S. Yi, J. Matsugami, and T. Yamasaki, “Assessment system of presentation
slide design using visual and structural features,” IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst. ,
vol. E105-D, no. 3, pp. 587–596, 2022.
[74] C. Liu, J. Wu, P. Kohli, and Y . Furukawa, “Raster-to-vector: Revisiting
ﬂoorplan transformation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. , 2017,
pp. 2214–2222.
[75] Z. Zeng, X. Li, Y . K. Yu, and C.-W. Fu, “Deep ﬂoor plan recognition
using a multi-task network with room-boundary-guided attention,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. , 2019, pp. 9095–9103.
[76] C. Mura, R. Pajarola, K. Schindler, and N. Mitra, “Walk2map: Extracting
ﬂoor plans from indoor walk trajectories,” Comput. Graph. Forum , vol. 40,
no. 2, pp. 375–388, 2021.
[77] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L. Yuille,
“Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets,
atrous convolution, and fully connected CRFs,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. , vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 834–848, Apr. 2018.
[78] L.-C. Chen, Y . Zhu, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam,
“Encoder-decoder with atrous separable convolution for semantic image
segmentation,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. , 2018, pp. 801–818.
[79] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. pattern Recognit. , 2016,
pp. 770–778.
[80] X. Yan and J. Han, “gSpan: Graph-based substructure pattern mining,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining , 2002, pp. 721–724.
[81] G. Dong and J. Li, “Efﬁcient mining of emerging patterns: Discovering
trends and differences,” in Proc. 5th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
Discov. Data Mining , 1999, pp. 43–52.
[82] K. Ohara, T. Yamasaki, and K. Aizawa, “An intuitive system for searching
apartments using ﬂoor plans and areas of rooms,” in Proc. 78th Nat. Conv.
IPSJ , 2016, vol. 2016, pp. 311–312.
[83] J. J. McGregor, “Backtrack search algorithms and the maximal common
subgraph problem,” Softw.: Pract. Experience , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 23–34,
1982.
[84] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. , 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[85] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network
training by reducing internal covariate shift,” in Proc. 32nd Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 448–456.
[86] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdi-
nov, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting,”
J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1929–1958, 2014.
[87] M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. Williams, J. Winn, and A. Zisserman,
“The pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vis. ,
vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 303–338, 2010.
[88] P. ITU-T, “Methods, metrics and procedures for statistical evaluation,
qualiﬁcation and comparison of objective quality prediction models (p.
1401),” 2020. [Online]. Available: http://handle.itu.int/11.1002/1000/
14159
[89] A. L. Maas et al., “Rectiﬁer nonlinearities improve neural network acoustic
models,” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , vol. 30, no. 1, 2013, p. 3.

===== PAGE 14 =====
6742 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, VOL. 25, 2023
Taro Narahara (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in mathematics from Waseda University,
Tokyo, Japan, the M.Arch. degree from Washington
University, St. Louis, MO, USA, the M.S. degree in
design and computation from the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, and the
Doctor of Design degree from Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA, USA. He is currently an Associate
Professor with the Hillier College of Architecture and
Design, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark,
NJ, USA. Between 2018 and 2020, he was a Visiting
Scholar with the ETH Zurich’s Institute of Technology in Architecture, Switzer-
land, and with the Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
The University of Tokyo, Japan. His research interests include architectural de-
sign and machine learning. Dr. Narahara is a member of ACM, SIGGRAPH,
CAADRIA, and IEICE. He worked on award-winning projects such as the Mori
Art Museum while associated with Gluckman Mayner Architects and Skidmore,
Owings & Merrill LLP as a Licensed Architect.
Toshihiko Yamasaki (Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in electronic engineering, the M.S. degree
in information and communication engineering, and
the Ph.D. degree from the The University of Tokyo,
Japan, in 1999, 2001, and 2004, respectively. He is
currently a Professor with the Department of Infor-
mation and Communication Engineering, Graduate
School of Information Science and Technology, The
University of Tokyo. He was a JSPS Fellow for Re-
search Abroad and a Visiting Scientist with Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY , USA, from February 2011 to
February 2013. His research interests include attractiveness computing based on
multimedia Big Data analysis, pattern recognition, and machine learning. Dr.
Yamasaki is a member of ACM, AAAI, IEICE, ITE, and IPSJ.